chore: change instances of "qgb" to "Blobstream", update workflow (#1115)
celestiaorg/docs: docs/nodes/blobstream-intro.md

Reviewer: I will make another pass on this after the other feedback is addressed

---
sidebar_label: Blobstream
description: An overview of Blobstream.
---

# Blobstream

Blobstream, covered previously in
[the Celestia blog post](https://blog.celestia.org/celestiums/),
introduces the concept of a layer 2 (L2), which is an EVM L2
rollup that uses Celestia for data availability
but settles on Ethereum (or any other EVM L1 chain).

This page and following tutorials will go over Blobstream and how validators on Celestia can run it.

If you're looking to learn more, you can view
[the `orchestrator-relayer` repository](https://github.com/celestiaorg/orchestrator-relayer)
, and
[read more about Blobstream](https://github.com/celestiaorg/blobstream-contracts#how-it-works).

## Overview

Blobstream,
consists of two components: an [Orchestrator](../blobstream-orchestrator)
and a [Relayer](../blobstream-relayer).

> In the following diagram, we show how a layer 2 would post data to
> Celestia and then verify that it was published in the target EVM chain.
> 
> In fact, data will first be attested to by the Celestia validator set, i.e. signing commitments committing to the data. Then, these signatures will be relayed to the target EVM chain (in this case, Ethereum). Finally,
> the layer 2, or any party, will be able to verify that the data was published to Celestia directly on the EVM chain on the Blobstream smart contract. You can
> reference
> [the Blobstream smart contract](https://github.com/celestiaorg/blobstream-contracts/blob/master/src/Blobstream.sol).
> 
> ![Blobstream-Architecture](../img/blobstream/Blobstream.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following diagram, we show how a layer 2 would post data to
Celestia and then verify that it was published in the target EVM chain.

![Blobstream-Architecture](../img/blobstream/Blobstream.png)

In fact, data will first be attested to by the Celestia validator set, i.e. signing commitments committing to the data. Then, these signatures will be relayed to the target EVM chain (in this case, Ethereum). Finally,
the layer 2, or any party, will be able to verify that the data was published to Celestia directly on the EVM chain on the Blobstream smart contract. You can
reference
[the Blobstream smart contract](https://github.com/celestiaorg/blobstream-contracts/blob/master/src/Blobstream.sol).
```

The specification of Blobstream `Valset`s, which track the Celestia validator set
changes, can be found in [ADR 002](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/docs/architecture/adr-002-qgb-valset.md).

Blobstream data commitments, which represent commitments over sets of blocks
defined by a data commitment window, are
discussed more in-depth in
[ADR 003](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/docs/architecture/adr-003-qgb-data-commitments.md).

The Orchestrator is part of the validator setup and works as follows:

- Celestia App: creates an attestation on the state machine level that needs to
  be signed
- The Orchestrator: queries the attestation, signs it, then submits the signature
  to the Blobstream P2P network

The diagram below goes over this process.

![Blobstream-Orchestrator](../img/blobstream/blobstream-orchestrator.png)

The relayer submits the attestations' signatures from the Blobstream P2P network to the target EVM chain.

> > **_NOTE:_** If the contract is still not deployed, then it needs to be deployed before its used by the relayer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **_NOTE:_** If the contract is still not deployed, then it needs to be deployed before its used by the relayer. Check the [deployment documentation](./blobstream-deploy.md) for more details.
```

The diagram below goes over this process.

![Blobstream-Relayer](../img/blobstream/blobstream-relayer.png)

You can learn more about the mechanics behind the Relayer in
[ADR 004](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/docs/architecture/adr-004-qgb-relayer-security.md).

## Blobstream and data availability committees (DACs)

### Decentralization and security

Blobstream is built on Celestia, which uses a CometBFT-based proof-of-stake

> system. An incorrect data availability attestation in this system can be
> penalized, ensuring validators act in good faith. Thus, Blobstream shares the same security assumptions as Celestia. In contrast, data availability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
system. An incorrect data availability attestation in this system will ultimately be
penalized (currently not implemented), ensuring validators act in good faith. Thus, Blobstream shares the same security assumptions as Celestia. In contrast, data availability
```

committees (DACs), are typically centralized or semi-centralized, relying on
a specific set of entities or individuals to vouch for data avaiability.

### Mechanism of verification

Blobstream uses data availability attestations, which are Merkle roots of the

> L2 data, to confirm that the necessary data is present on Celestia. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
batched L2 data, to confirm that the necessary data is present on Celestia. When
```

> a specific set of entities or individuals to vouch for data avaiability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a specific set of entities or individuals to vouch for data availability.
```

Ethereum's L2 contract updates its state, it checks with Blobstream to confirm

> that data's presence on Celestia. In contrast, a DAC would rely on attestations

Reviewer: > it checks with Blobstream to confirm that data's presence on Celestia

How this? I am not aware of this happening or I don't get this part

Author: reworked in https://github.com/celestiaorg/docs/pull/1115/commits/ba3b63238fa88379334c509b748d14ec8ad42f91

> on Ethereum doesn't directly check with Blobstream, but relies on the data
> availability guarantee provided by Blobstream. In contrast, a DAC would rely on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on Ethereum can check directly with Blobstream if the data is published on Celestia. Similarly, a DAC would rely on
```

or confirmations from its permissioned members.

### Flexibility and scalability

Blobstream offers high-throughput data availability for Ethereum L2s, striking
a balance between scalability and security. It isn't bound by Ethereum's gas
costs, as Celestia's resource pricing is more byte-focused rather than
computation-centric. The scalability costs of a DAC would largely hinge on its

> specific design, but it may not achieve the same balance as Blobstream.

Reviewer: Not sure about this too

---
sidebar_label: Blobstream

> description: An overview of the Blobstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: An overview of Blobstream.
```

---

# Blobstream

> The Blobstream, covered previously in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blobstream, covered previously in
```

[the Celestia blog post](https://blog.celestia.org/celestiums/),
introduces the concept of a layer 2 (L2), which is an EVM L2
rollup that uses Celestia for data availability
but settles on Ethereum (or any other EVM L1 chain).

> This page and following tutorials will go over the Quantum Gravity
> Bridge and how Validators on Celestia can run it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page and following tutorials will go over Blobstream and how Validators on Celestia can run it.
```

If you're looking to learn more, you can view
[the `orchestrator-relayer` repository](https://github.com/celestiaorg/orchestrator-relayer)
, and

> [read more about the Blobstream](https://github.com/celestiaorg/quantum-gravity-bridge#how-it-works).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[read more about Blobstream](https://github.com/celestiaorg/quantum-gravity-bridge#how-it-works).
```

## Overview

> The Blobstream,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blobstream,
```

consists of two components: an [Orchestrator](../blobstream-orchestrator)
and a [Relayer](../blobstream-relayer).

In the following diagram, we show how a layer 2 would post the data to
Celestia. This will later be attested to by the Celestia validator set, and
eventually posted to the target EVM chain (in this case, Ethereum). Then,
the layer 2, or any party, will be able to verify the attestations, i.e. valsets
and data commitments, directly on the EVM chain on the Blobstream smart contract. You can
reference

> [the Blobstream smart contract](https://github.com/celestiaorg/quantum-gravity-bridge/blob/master/src/QuantumGravityBridge.sol).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[the Blobstream smart contract](https://github.com/celestiaorg/blobstream-contracts/blob/master/src/Blobstream.sol).
```

![Blobstream-Architecture](../img/blobstream/blobstream-diagram.png)

> The specification of the Blobstream `Valset`s, which track the Celestia validator set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specification of Blobstream `Valset`s, which track the Celestia validator set
```

changes, can be found in [ADR 002](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/docs/architecture/adr-002-qgb-valset.md).

> The Blobstream data commitments, which represent commitments over sets of blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blobstream data commitments, which represent commitments over sets of blocks
```

Blobstream uses data availability attestations, which are Merkle roots of the
L2 data, to confirm that the necessary data is present on Celestia. When
Ethereum's L2 contract updates its state, it checks with Blobstream to confirm
that data's presence on Celestia. In contrast, a DAC would rely on attestations
or confirmations from its permissioned members.

### Flexibility and scalability

Blobstream offers high-throughput data availability for Ethereum L2s, striking
a balance between scalability and security. It isn't bound by Ethereum's gas
costs, as Celestia's resource pricing is more byte-focused rather than
computation-centric. The scalability costs of a DAC would largely hinge on its
specific design, but it may not achieve the same balance as Blobstream.

In summary, both Blobstream and DACs aim to ensure off-chain data availability,
but Blobstream offers a more decentralized, secure, and scalable solution
compared to the potential centralized nature of DACs.

## Setting up the Blobstream

The following sections in this category presume you have the following setup:

- A Celestia App
[validator node](../consensus-node#optional-setting-up-a-validator) running

> - A Celestia Node [bridge node](../bridge-node) running

Reviewer: this one is not needed for running Blostream

Author: 1106558898e8cf71bd448d621c7ec215f351e4c1 removed bridge node
